- Feature Name: N/A
- Start Date: 2026-03-27
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

## Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC defines rules and suggestions for using AI (artificial intelligence) models, such as Large Language Models (LLMs), in official Rust communication channels. It forbids non-trivial usage of LLMs for producing the essence of content in those channels, to ensure that the Project retains its unique Voice and that the original thoughts of the author are being relayed to the reader without being distorted by AI suggestions and baselines.

> Note that this RFC only deals with AI usage in our official public communication channels, and does not affect e.g. code or other forms of contributions.

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The Rust Project has several public communication channels that are considered to be official, such as:

- The [Rust blog](https://blog.rust-lang.org), including the Inside Rust section and Rust release announcements.
- Rust Project social media accounts (BlueSky, YouTube, etc.).
- The [Rust website](https://rust-lang.org).

Content in these channels is published by individual Rust Project members, who project their own thoughts and style into it in a relatively autonomous manner. We do not require Project-wide consensus to publish every tweet or blog post, as that would be impractical. Especially the Rust Blog could be seen as an aggregation platform, where various teams and individuals publish posts *independently*; a single approval by any team lead is enough to publish such a blog post. This reflects the unique distributed nature of Rust's governance structure.

At the same time, anything posted to those channels can be, and *is*, interpreted by the wider Rust community and the outside world to be the official communication of the Rust Project as a whole. This is hardly surprising, as this is how official communication channels work for most organizations and companies. That means that content in our official channels also *reflects* on the Project as a whole, not just on its individual authors.

When someone consumes content (e.g. reads a blog post or watches a video) on our channels, they enter in an implicit contract with us. They want to invest their time by reading the unique thoughts of the author, and expect that the author spent effort to make those thoughts be worth consuming. The Rust Project prides itself on producing software that is reliable and trustworthy and fostering a diverse and unique community, and we want to achieve the same tenets when we communicate.

When the essence[^define-essence] of text, audio, or video content is generated by an AI model, whether partially or fully, it can subvert its uniqueness and trustworthiness, and thus break the implicit contract made with the person who consumes the content (the reader). Here are some examples of why that can be problematic:

- Despite the author's best efforts, AI-generated (or altered) content often contains tell-tale signs of being AI-generated, which some readers find off-putting, and it makes them lose interest in consuming it.
- If the usage of AI is not disclosed, readers sometimes experience an "uncanny valley" situation, where they are unsure whether they are reading the thoughts of a human or the output of an AI model, and it leads to them guessing which is the case. That is not a pleasing experience for some people. 
- It is quite common to encounter low-effort AI-generated content on the internet (colloquially termed "slop"). Due to its prevalence, some readers automatically assume that a content is low effort when they learn or recognize that it was generated using AI technologies, even if that is not the case in reality. This can unnecessarily overshadow the quality of the content itself.
- Prompts are typically shorter than the generated output, which leads to the models "filling in the blanks". Due to the way AI models are trained and how they work, the content they produce converges towards an "averaged" style, which is likely different from what the author would write themselves. **Because of that, such communication may lose the unique style, creativity, and "voice" of its author, which is something that we want to amplify, and not diminish**. This is the most important aspect that this policy tries to protect; we want to ensure that our communication relays the original and unique thoughts of the human author.

[^define-essence]: The RFC defines [later](#policy) what is meant by the "essence" of content.

Using AI to produce content could help us make more of it or save time. But we willingly give those potential benefits up to ensure that the thoughts we share with the world are not distorted by AI suggestions and baselines, so that people we communicate with can trust that they read the ideas of the author and not the output of an AI model. Our content can come in various forms and qualities; it can be insightful, interesting, fun, boring, too long, dull, or whatever else. But most importantly, it should relay the unique thoughts of a human to another human, as that is what communication is all about.

## Policy
[policy]: #policy

This policy forbids the use of AI models to fully or partially produce or modify content (text, audio, video) on official communication channels of the Rust Project in a way that alters its *essence*. We define the essence of a content as its main part that reflects the unique style and voice of the author, and which captures the thoughts that the author wants to share with the world. This ensures that we speak in our own unique voices.

Exceptions to this rule, and the scope of the policy, are described in more detail below.

### Auxiliary usage

There are use-cases for leveraging AI to produce or modify content in a way that does not alter its essence, but merely generates or modifies its auxiliary properties. We call this *auxiliary usage* of AI.

Auxiliary usage of AI to produce content on Rust public communication channels is allowed. Though we urge Rust Project members to always use it with care and review the output to ensure that it still matches the author's expectations and accurately represents the thoughts they wanted to share with others.

Here is a non-exhaustive list of auxiliary usages of AI:

- **Fixing typos**. Using a spellchecker or a typo checker, even if it is backed by AI technology, does not change the essence of written text; it merely fixes misspellings and similar small issues that the author might have missed.
- **Post-processing of audio and video**. This is essentially the equivalent of fixing typos for audio and video content. As an example, tuning the audio levels or reducing noise in an audio recording, or balancing the color of a video recording using AI technologies does not alter the content's essence.  
- **Audio transcripts**. Using AI to generate transcripts or subtitles from an audio or a video recording does not alter the essence of the content.
  - Since in this case AI can potentially generate a lot of text that is then read by people watching the video or listening to the audio recording, the output should be carefully reviewed by a human, and ideally the usage of AI for generating such transcripts should be disclosed.
- **Speech-to-text and similar accessibility technologies**. Some people are using AI-assisted technologies to produce text because of e.g. medical reasons. Using an AI model to transfer the author's thoughts from speech to text does not alter its essence; it merely changes its representation to a form that can be more easily consumed by other people.
- **Preparing background materials**. This policy does not forbid using AI models to e.g. analyze data, where that analysis is then used as a basis for writing a report or a blog post. However, the final text should always be written by a human, to satisty the spirit of this policy.
  - It goes without saying that usage of AI models to analyze data should always take data privacy policies and rules into account.
- **Using AI to brainstorm**. Some people like to converse with an AI model when writing text, e.g. by asking it to act as a curious reader to point out missing or unclear things in the text. In this case, care should be taken to not switch from brainstorming to content generation by letting the AI suggest parts of the text itself, as that is what this policy tries to avoid.  
  - As an alternative to using AI to brainstorm, the author can always consult e.g. some fellow Project member. After all, this policy is all about producing content by people that is then ingested by other people. So who better than a human could evaluate how a given text feels like!

As with every policy, there will be gray areas. For example, one could argue that letting AI produce stylistic edits to text does not modify its essence. This is not possible to define objectively. Changing the word order in a sentence, adding a comma or an article, or replacing a word by its synonym most likely does not alter the essence of the content. On the other hand, making sweeping changes across paragraphs, turning paragraphs into bullet points or vice versa, or performing other larger changes can already introduce the tell-tale signs of AI style in the text. We trust in the judgment of Rust Project members to evaluate whether the way they produce content on our official channels adheres to the spirit of this policy. When in doubt, it is always possible to ask other Project members for their opinion before publishing the content.

#### Translation

Since translation is a complex topic, it has its own section in this policy. In the majority of cases, the Rust Project produces its public content in the English language, though there are exceptions (e.g. the State of Rust survey is manually translated into multiple languages). However, not everyone can produce (or consume) content written in English, so some people use automated translation systems to translate it from or to other languages.

Any automated translation system (whether using AI or not) suffers from two issues:

- The quality of the translation itself. Even with today's technologies, translation is not always perfect. As an example, it can produce words or sentences that make sense on their own, but do correspond to the message that the author wanted to relay in a given context. This is relatively common when technical terms are involved, as those can be challenging to translate without the right context. Reading such improperly translated text can be confusing for the reader, and can be even found offensive if the translation is egregiously bad, as it shows a lack of respect for both the target language and the reader. This can reduce the trustworthiness of our communication.
  - The quality of an automated translation can be greatly improved by letting a human who knows the target language check the translation result and fix any inconsistencies.
- Dilution of the author's original thoughts. Similarly to AI content generation, automated translation can diminish the original thoughts and style of the author, and change what they meant to say or how they meant to say it. This gets further exacerbated if there are multiple layers of translation involved. If the author automatically translates content from language to A to language B and publishes the result, and then a reader who does not understand language B uses similar technology to translate the content from language B to language C, the chance of some of the original "signal" being lost or distorted increases. This can go against the spirit of this policy, which attempts to ensure that the creative thoughts of the author are relayed in the most pristine way possible.

With that being said, the language barrier issue is real, and we acknowledge that translations can be invaluable. This policy thus makes the following recommendations around translations:

- Ideally, it is preferable to let a human, rather than a program, translate a given text to a different language, or at least let a human review the output of automated translation.
- If that is infeasible, then we suggest publishing the content in the original language of the author, to avoid signal loss from transitive translations, and let the reader perform the translation on their own terms, if necessary. A missing translation is better than a bad translation.
- If the author feels strongly that using an automated translation is the best solution in their circumstances, they should clearly disclose that the content was translated automatically, to let the reader know.

### Policy applicability

This policy only applies to public official communication channels that represent the Rust Project as a whole. Here is a non-exhaustive list of the most important spaces where it applies:

- The Rust Blog (`blog.rust-lang.org`), including all sub blogs (currently Inside Rust and Release announcements).
- Rust social media channels, such as Rust Project BlueSky or YouTube accounts.
- The Rust website (`rust-lang.org`).
- Other websites owned and managed by the Rust Project, such as `rustup.rs`.
  - It should be noted that we cannot apply the policy to content provided by users outside the Rust Project which is hosted on our websites. For example, the `docs.rs` or `crates.io` websites host documentation of user crates; this policy does not apply to such "third-party" user content.

It also applies to public materials that the Rust Project produces and that are shared through the above channels, such as reports or surveys.

The policy does NOT apply to:

- Messages made by individual Rust Project members on platforms such as GitHub or Zulip.
- Other forms of contributions that could be AI-generated, e.g. code contributions (those are covered by other policies).
- The public communication channels of the Rust Foundation.
- Communication channels that are not officially associated with the Rust Project, e.g. the personal blogs of Rust Project members.

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

### Saving effort

Using AI can save time and effort when producing content, which is the main reason why many people use it for this use-case. However, that is not always necessarily a good thing. As was said in the motivation section, we want to ensure that we transfer the unique thoughts of the author to the reader. The content does not have to be perfect, but it should be authentic, and that is hard to ensure when AI is used.

The cost-benefit effect of using AI to generate content is asymmetrical. Forcing people to consume AI output through our channels can lead to lack of trust in the Project's communication and diminishes the unique voice of Project Members that we want to share with the world. On the other hand, using AI at most allows us to produce content faster; but producing content is not a race to be won. Furthermore, many of the most time-consuming activities that could be made easier by AI actually fall under the [auxiliary usage](#auxiliary-usage) exception, where AI usage is not disallowed.

## Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

### Not having a policy

As always, the alternative is not to have any policy for our official communication. However, using AI to produce content is a very controversial topic and has disadvantages described earlier in this document. Furthermore, using AI in our public communication channels reflects on the whole Project, so we should make it clear to authors who produce such content what is acceptable in this scenario, to avoid uncertainty.

### Requiring disclosure

An alternative to banning the usage of AI for producing content is to require disclosure that AI was used. This allows the reader to quickly judge whether they are interested in ingesting such content or not, and it can also help them understand how AI was used and what parts of the content did it affect.

This alternative could be more comfortable for Rust Project members who want to use AI to generate content. However, even though having a disclosure is much better than not having it, as was stated in the motivation section, we want to ensure that the content we produce relays the original thoughts of its author in a way that does not diminish its uniqueness, creativity, and trustworthiness. The best way to ensure that is to not use AI to produce the essence of said content.

## Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- Wikipedia bans the usage of [LLMs][wikipedia-ban] to generate or rewrite articles. Same as this policy, it contains exceptions. It is possible to perform small copyedits if they do not change the meaning of the content, and it is possible to translate articles to English, as long as the proper [guidelines][wikipedia-translation-guidelines] are followed.
- In the 2022 and 2023 State of Rust survey, the Rust Survey team struggled to prepare translations in time due to lacking bandwidth, so it published several translations of the survey that were automatically translated. Even though these translations were then reviewed by humans knowledgeable in the target language, it was a lot of text, and some translations ended up being really low-quality. Expectedly, and rightfully so, this led to the disappointment and frustration ([1][rust-survey-translations-1], [2][rust-survey-translations-2]) of some people who tried to fill the survey in those languages. It was explicitly noted that this reduced the trustworthiness of our communication for some respondents.

[wikipedia-ban]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Writing_articles_with_large_language_models
[wikipedia-translation-guidelines]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:LLM-assisted_translation
[rust-survey-translations-1]: https://github.com/rust-lang/surveys/issues/227
[rust-survey-translations-2]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/on-the-availability-of-the-rust-survey-2023-in-languages-other-than-english/104120

## Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

## Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities
